This
is great. So, okay, okay. Now, targets in Laos.
Now, generally speaking, the Ho Chi Minh Trail, we
got to the point where we operated so much, we
didn't know just about where it was, but you know,
the Ho Chi Minh Trail was like ants passing through
your lawn. You stop them up one direction, they
move over a hundred feet and go through the jungle
and establish another one. Nobody can really
understand this capability of the Viet Cong in
getting supplies down that Ho Chi Minh Trail from
North Vietnam to South Vietnam until they've
actually seen it. Then you can understand it. It's
almost unbelievable for me to describe it and for
you to believe that there's no reason why we
couldn't stop these supplies. But when men have an
A-frame on their back and will carry
hundred-pound loads on their back and walk
through the jungle under complete canopy, which
you can't even penetrate with film, then maybe you
understand. And they walked all the way.
Bicycles, they'd ride bicycles there. If I'm
getting off the subject. We knew generally where
these routes were, and at night they felt they were
free to down the usual trail, because nobody could
see them. Well, of course, this stopped when we got
the gunship capability over there that had the
night vision for the infrared flare, which would
go by Texas Institute. And again, I was very proud
of getting this introduced into the combat forces
over there. But there were at times where we knew
there were concentrations of supplies, you know,
and relays to go from one day and one night, then
stop, then the next night they'd go another maybe
10 or 12 miles and they'd stop and always move at
night we you know eventually find these
concentrations and it always turned out that
wherever these concentrations were sure enough
there'd be some AA defense from them operated by
Pathet Laos now this up down Laos because they knew
if we found them we're going to hit them well
they're going to start trying to protect them with
AA and eventually got to be very capable so it built
radar directed AA in Laos This is not very well
known. But these targets had to be hit, and this was
General Mulmire's responsibility. He had to- one
of the basic doctors of air force, of course, air
tactics, you've got to hit them in the supply area
where it hurts the top supply. Interdiction, if
you will. Tactical air warfare. Now, did he have
authority to hit these targets? Well, he had to
properly identify them and get permission from
Ambassador Sullivan's to hit these targets.
It required communications that had made things
more complex and halted. It hindered operations,
but it worked. But when these particular targets
might, let's say, be near a, let's say, a habitated
center, I call it an inhabited center, a town, if
you will, in Laos, which, if you bomb there, it
maybe hits civilians. And this is where the
problems came up. This was forbidden, absolutely
forbidden. You cannot hit certain targets in
Laos. Well, in warfare, sometimes, you know, it's
difficult. Particularly in the jungle of the
southeast states, it's hard to identify targets
at best. But sometimes mistakes were made. And
we'd hit targets, and we'd kill civilians. And
this was when the fire would fly between Ambrose
Sullivan and Seventh Air Force. And again, this
was a matter of refereeing and arbitration, where
I came into picture. A lot of cases where nothing
were but saving people's feelings, and
Ambassador Sullivan was well aware of the
difficulties we had in those places. What were
some of these places that you were hitting, and do
you remember any of the major accidents, so to
speak? No, just a matter of fact, at night, a
bomber, a fighter bomber, misidentifying the
target, or maybe even missing the target, and
screwing his bomb across the city.
Understandable era, definitely not
intentional, but generally that's what it was. I
don't remember any gross eras like hitting a dam.
That never did come. What were some of the, what
about the targets? Did you ever get any of these
Russian installations? Russian? No, did you ever
get any of these installations? I thought you said
they had some AA. Oh, yes, as a matter of fact. You
said in Laos. Oh, yeah, we lost airplanes in Laos.
Okay, did you ever, those were targeted, weren't
they? Yeah. Were they knocked down? We had
airplanes knocked down by AA fire in Laos. As a
matter of fact, one of the One of the most dangerous
and difficult targets for pilots, and boy, they
thought twice when they were trying to hit that
target, was a pass. I forget the name of it, but it
was just in the southeast, southwestern corner of
North Vietnam across the mountains into Laos,
just at, you might say, the point where North
Vietnam and South Vietnam came together at the
demilitarized zone. Yeah. where Laos was on the
western border of both of them. There was a pass
through there, a mountain pass. And this was, you
know, the pass normally is where most of the roads
are in transportation nationally. So that's
where the Ho Chi Minh Trail went through there. And
we knew there were foreign supplies through
there. And it got where we started hitting them.
Well, the more we struck it, the more they put AA
defenses there. The more we drank it, the more they
put better AA defenses in there. Finally, they got
these radar-controlled defenses. Boy, it was a
tough target. It was almost like going against a
barrel of a cannon. To my knowledge, I don't ever
remember a missile as such, a SAM, ever being
deployed in Laos. I don't think the Russians would
permit the North Vietnamese to do it. But they got
radar-controlled AA weapons.
and we lost airplanes. And I don't ever remember us
losing an airplane over Laos to a MiG. The MiGs in
North Vietnam, they very, very seldom would ever
fly over into Thailand, or Laos. And I don't ever
remember a MiG coming into South Vietnam.
And maybe their rules were different. I don't
know. Now I do remember we lost a C-47 in northern
stretches of Laos. We had strayed and got off
course and got too close to the North Vietnam
border. It may have actually been within North
Vietnam and it was intercepted by a MiG and shot
down. We know this by the pilot calling in and
saying, I'm being attacked. We lost the airplane
with all the people on it. Was he killed, or did he
ever come back? Was he killed? The whole crew was
killed. Everybody aboard. No one bailed out? They
were shot down. That was one of the roads through
the air. Yeah. Okay. Now, how Tell me about, you
said you had a few Air American people on your base.
On the Thai Air Base. Yeah. In fact, I was there too,
but this was on the Thai Air Base. Exactly, but I
know at Udorn. What about, did you meet any of these
people? Oh, yeah. I ate dinner with them many,
matter of fact, they had such a terrific mess on
Sunday, I always went over and had dinner at their
mess hall on Sunday. No kidding. Fantastic. You
had good relations with them. As a matter of fact,
you see this carried me back to my earlier days as a
member of the Flying Tigers. Sure, because they
were in a sense a similar outfit, weren't they?
Exactly. They had what was called, incidentally,
they did better than we did though, financial
wise, they had what they called a $100,000 club.
See, this outfit had been over a long, long time
before we got in the war. And they were paid
terrific salaries. Do you remember what it was,
how much you were paid? No, I don't, but $100,000
club was a man who became a member of it when he had
earned $100,000. And I know some of them have been
over a few years. In one year? Oh, no, no, no. Two or
three years. Two or three years they could make
$100,000? By various means. This wasn't all paid.
Were they former Air Force pilots, most of them?
Yeah, some of them were. Half of them, would you
say? I don't know. I don't know that much about the
exact organization. I'd say they had about, they
must have had about always a total of at least six or
eight helicopters. Sometimes, see, they had them
across the river at the airport at Ben 10. But their
main maintenance base and major supply and
maintenance, if you will, depot level was right
there on the base of Udorn. They had two or three
C-123s, and they must have had, or they had to have
at least 150 people. A hundred and fifty at Udorn?
It's a big operation. Between Udorn and
Vientiane. It's a big operation. Oh, are you
kidding? Of course. Well, now that doesn't
include the big supply base they had down at
Tocqueville where they actually stored and
eventually had a supply operation, I mean a supply
storage space right there at my base at Udorn. I had
to provide an extra ramp. We actually built it for
them. An extra ramp and hangar, well if you will, a
supply warehouse where they stored their their
bombs and their what they called A packages of rice
and clothing, medicine. Were they all American
citizens or were there some foreigners? No, no,
all Americans.
Some Laotian and some Thais.
I might even enlighten you on even another type of
operation that's probably very, very little
known. I actually got involved in coordination,
and you can imagine the people involved, between
the Thais, the Laotians, the two ambassadors, and
Air America, and and me, of moving some Thai army
artillery over into Laos to actually help them in
their fighting. Man by ties. Really?
And you transported them up there? Or did Air
American transport them? Air American
transported them. How many went up there? Oh, it
was a very small operation. Just so you might know,
they had detachment with maybe two or three pieces
of artillery. How effective it was, I don't know. I
didn't. Did they go up there to train LAO's? Oh no,
they fight well. Fight for them. Probably went up
to train them, but that meant fighting too. This
was when the General Mao, M-E-O, and his, see there
were good Pathet Maos and bad Pathet Laos. He was
the good Pathet Lao. When he was being hard pressed
and pushed back south, towards Vientiane by the
North Vietnamese and Northeastern Laos in a
determined effort to wipe him out. The North
Vietnamese decided to eliminate him. He was a very
effective little
ragtag force, if you will, and completely
supported by the CIA. And when he was being pushed
and needed some support, well, the Thais tried to
help. Well, that's the type of thing, one of the
types of things I got involved in. The Thais were,
they were afraid of the North Vietnamese. Oh,
yeah. In fact, this, when I mentioned
insurrectionists in northern Thailand, it was
obvious a lot of them were North Vietnamese. Or, if
you will, Thailand
What, North Vietnamese refugees had come down
into northern Thailand and then were subverted
and trained and then sent back, you know, got back
to North Vietnam, then were trained and paid
accordingly, and then stepped back into North
Thailand as a, really as a North Vietnamese agent.
It got awful sticky and complicated.
But as I say, it was extremely interesting. No
kidding. Now, when Thailand sent these artillery
men over, and the two or three pieces of artillery,
did they dress them in Laotian uniforms?
I don't remember, but I do know this, that I doubt
it. I got an idea that they had just, if you will, the
black uniform on. Maybe it wasn't. It may have been
just black pajamas. The term black I use, as a
matter of fact, that defines this type of an
operation. It's a black operation. This is the CIA
term. In other words, unknown, you can't see it, or
words of that effect. But I remember it, and we
often laugh about it on my staff, C-123 would come
in some night at Udorn. No markings on it
whatsoever, not even any numbers. No markings on
it whatsoever. Painted black. The plane was
painted black? Painted black. And land. And we
always grabbed a lot of little bitty men that all of
a sudden flow out of this thing, an Air America
vehicle, pick them all up, put them in this truck,
close the end of the truck with the curtain, and
take them off to a special barracks. It was not part
of my responsibility on the Udorn Air Base, and
close the doors. And you go by there in daytime,
you'd never see anybody, and you wouldn't even
know what's going on. But the following night,
about midnight, a truck come up, all these little
piece of men would get out and get in this truck, and
the truck would run up to this airplane, this black
airplane for it, and it would open up, and they'd
get in the back of this and see it's an airlift like
the airplane. Sure. And I'm talking about thirty
or forty people. All these little bitty men would
get in there and they, you know at night they looked
black. How they were dressed we don't know. God
knows they were probably dressed in typical
civilian garb of the
Laotian countrymen or peasants living in the
jungle. That's probably the way they were
dressed. And then this airplane had planned upon
running me to take off and head over into the
lounge. You didn't know who they were? Did you ever
find out anything? Did you ever ask? Oh, yeah. We,
at times, various times, get sufficient answers
to know that these were special paid and special
trained jungle warfare people by the CIA. And some
of them were actually laid on by General
Westmoreland's command down in Saigon. to be
carried over into the Laotian area and
some landing zone, as we called it, a big enough
area where the airplane could land and let them get
out. And then by their training and all, they,
coming from that area, they knew exactly the
countryside. And then they would station
themselves along the Ho Chi Minh Trail and
actually report back in some cases by radio, and in
some cases by just recording information and
maintaining data, and then being picked up, let's
say, three nights later on the flow of supplies
down. And sometimes, actually, the instructions
to lay on ambushes and kill North Vietnamese
coming down North Vietnam, this type of
operation. A lot of this went on. A lot of it. How
free were the Air America people in discussing
these
actions with you when you went over there on Sunday
and had a brunch with them? They were very
well-trained in this area. They didn't talk about
it. They were unusually well-trained. And I knew
better than to ask the question, quite frankly.
They'd talk about some of the resupply missions in
the area. I'd go up to LZ-2, Leningrad 2, and stuff
off some rice. They'd talk about things like that.
That was why they'd be shot at. Boy, I got a bullet
hole today. They lost a few pilots and
helicopters. Again, it carried me back to my
experience. And if they were supplying someplace
and they were shot down, and they were captured,
What would they do? Would they say they were
American citizens? What kind of papers would they
have on them? Did you ever find out? No, I don't
think they were carrying papers on them. I'm sure a
lot of the... I'll tell you what, I'll bet you some
would think about it. I imagine a lot of the
experience in their operations
probably was copied from some of our experience in
Flying Tigers. I don't remember them carrying any
identification on their back like we did. as part
of the, in other words, as part of the Laotian Air
Force. I don't know of any occasions where one of
them was captured. I don't ever remember this
being brought up. I know some were killed. Yeah,
they were shot down there. I got an idea that one of
them was captured. He was probably shot. I don't
know. And that's the reason they were high paid.
They knew that. They definitely were flying at me.
As a matter of fact, I had to coordinate a mission
one time where actually we flew aircraft over and
provided air cover for one of their operations
that was so close to the front of the North Vietnam
in Laos. You know, sometimes we did get in air
support with them. But that was unusual. What kind
of mission was that? It was a resupply, but they had
to drop supplies to General Miles' forces so close
to where the fighting front, if you will, between
the North Vietnamese that they were apt to be fired
at by the North Vietnamese and shot down. So you
sent a couple of jets over there. Yeah, to
suppress. And just the appearance of the jets
alone would keep the North Vietnamese from
firing. This happened two or three times. And
actually, we, in coordination through my control
center between Ambassador Sullivan's control
center in Laos and General Mulminer's
headquarters, we actually laid on some strike
missions with my F-4s and F-105s and Thailand
bases against the North Vietnamese when they were
really swarming down against the Laotians when
they were approaching the capital of Vientiane.
at Ambassador Sullivan's request. That's one
time Ambassador Sullivan got in bed with General
Martin. He needed his support. And the provided
one. This was a war that was very little
publicized. Oh, absolutely. Very little
publicized. Not until the Pentagon gave us, did
you? Okay, well, we're doing a great job here. So
the Air America people, you had a have a good sized
contingency of them. I'm surprised at the
numbers. Well, I may be overestimated, but it's
bound to be that many total. OK.
Now let's turn to the Special Forces Air Force
group. Tell me about their capabilities. You
mentioned before that you thought they were
outstanding. This was the OB-26 twin engine,
basically a light bomber, attack type aircraft,
and little AT-6, I believe that's what they were
called, T-26, T-26, T-26, trainer 26 aircraft,
little single engine It's really a trainer
airplane. It could
carry two 250-pound bombs, something like that.
It had guns in it, but when we give these type of
aircraft to Thailand or to Laos or to South
Vietnamese, they'd put guns on it, use it as an
attack airplane, a fighter. But, you know,
definitely was not comparable to modern fighter.
But they were slow, relatively slow compared to
jet aircraft. They could fly at night, just like an
airplane. But being slower, you
had greater time to identify a target and greater
maneuverability to attack it and say, less room
for error. I mean, much more room and latitude for
making an error and being able to correct your
position in order to actually put a bomb on a
target. This is a controversial thing and was, and
to a certain extent still is, in the Air Force. Do
you want a slow aircraft to provide ground air
support, or do you want and need a modern jet, a
high-speed jet, to provide close air support and
ground attack? it uh some people say it's
controversial in uh in real high threat warfare
you definitely have to have the high-speed jet
otherwise you wouldn't live you'd be shut down now
in a jungle warfare and particularly over there
where you don't have a high defense to go against
then this light airplane is much better and that's
the reason we had some special forces in thailand
in a certain area and that's the reason they were
employed in that particular area. We didn't
expect the North Vietnamese ever to get any
sophisticated anti-aircraft down the Ho Chi Minh
Trail. That's where these special forces drove
them. That's right. See, that's the reason they
were assigned there. So this doesn't, you have to
understand all this. Some decisions you think
might be idiotic and you don't understand them,
but really this was a sound decision. The only
thing that Momar got teed off about, TWD, was that
He
wanted modern forces. He didn't want any kind of an
airplane over there except a jet aircraft. And he
wanted, of course, he wanted primarily to knock
out the supply sewers. In other words, hit North
Vietnam. The way we should have done it, anyhow.
But here, part of his forces using up one of his base
was these little top-driven aircraft. Bomar
strenuously objected to it. But Ambassador
Sullivan, having, you know, a certain authority
and responsibility in Laos, obviously
overruled, so we got the Air Force forces there.
Well, now what's the capability? At night, and
particularly on moonlight night, in this little
slow T-26 with a cup of 250 pound bomb, and with guns
on it, 30 caliber guns,
against open targets, let's say a truck that you
could see on a moonlight night and didn't have any
tree cover. Gee, this was our plan perfect to knock
it out, and they got trucks. The B-26, which had a
much greater bomb capability and many more guns on
it, it had a much greater capability than the T-26,
and it did a good job. And our daily truck count,
which we had every morning, debriefings, you
know, stand-up briefings, what we do last night,
These little forces always had some truck kills,
or maybe an anti-aircraft site suppression. They
actually attacked and destroyed the state
government. Whereas the F-4s based at Ubon that
were special trained for night bombing missions
along the I remember talking to some pilots that
flew that aircraft on that type of mission, and
boy, it was a hairy operation at night. Also- They
could hear you coming to them. Well, no more than
you could hear the T-26 coming. But so, I mean, they
get from the ground, the North Vietnamese could
hear this airplane flying so slowly that they
could probably have, what, a few seconds warning
that this bomber's coming? Well, or is that- Now,
more sight, seeing one, than hearing. The hearing
was not that much different, but the sight of
seeing it, you know. But at night they wouldn't see
it. No, at night. But then, of course, you blew your
lights, running lights off. Sure. But operating
an F-4 and trying to find your target at a high speed
and then at a higher altitude and making the diving
pass and then recovering at night and, you know,
whether it's moonlight night or not, you had to go.
Boy, this was like flying in a,
well, it was difficult. Difficult task, and kind
of hairy, and it took special training. But they
killed trucks, but none of them were as effective
as what we called a gunship, a C-130, specially
equipped, that we eventually got into the base at
Ubon, and they were given a primary mission. of
operations against the Ho Chi Minh Trail. Now this
was a very effective— Tell me about this one. This
is a normal C-130 four-engine turboprop
transport that you've seen with Transport Truth.
It was manned with side firing out the side of the
fuselage.
Automatic turret-type machine gun operations
with 20 millimeter, and we eventually even
experimented with putting as high as a cannon,
what we called a cannon, 75 millimeter. Wow. How
did that work? We experimented with it at Eglin,
but it didn't get an operation for a while. I wasn't
over there whether it ever got an operation.
Didn't that stress on the client? recall was
automatically taken care of by suppression of
recall. But this was a very effective 50 caliber,
20 millimeter gun firing, you know, and special
maneuver that the airplane would go into and
actually trace the fire, you know, the pilot would
fly the airplane when he'd locate the truck. It was
clear before looking in for red. And
coordination, you'd be really on your toes and
just absolutely enthralled to hear a tape
recording of the coordination by radio teletype,
I mean radio telegraphy, you know, earphones, and
transmitting the aircraft between the pilot
flying the airplane and the gunner back there, and
a coordination between all of them. And let's say
the scanner's looking out, you know, by just
looking out the side of the airplane. and
protected the guy, let's say watching the FLIR,
before looking at the red display where the truck
was, in this turning maneuver, and then firing on
these trucks at night, and also taking pictures of
them, of the FLIR presentation, you know, on
another scope, and seeing the truck explode. It
was absolutely It's amazing to watch this
operation. Extremely effective. And boy, I tell
you, those were effective operations. But a
gunship put out just thousands of rounds per
second. Now, I'm telling you so many things that I
may be getting my nomenclature mixed up. But I'll
try to get all this straightened out about the
caliber, the size, and the types, the name, and
all, when I go through these.
Well, you used the gunships then. Yes, and they
were fragged by John Wilmer, 7th Air Force. All of
them were based as a unit. We had about, I think we
had a unit of about six of them at Ubon, Thailand,
right near Littleson border.
Gunships. Okay. Now, let me add this. As a result of
this type of operation, particularly the Special
Forces people, you know, who dedicated their
mission— They didn't fly gunships, did they? No,
no, no, no. But Special Forces people wanted it
because, boy, that was an advanced weapon, and
that's right down their alley, see. But this was
sort of a new innovation in tactical warfare. As a
matter of fact, General Lohmeyer monitored this
very carefully personally, and it turned out to be
very effective. And even some of the people, you
know, said, gee, we ought to have this thing in
Europe, you know, with such effective operations
against ground forces. That thing would not live
in a classical air battle area. It'd be shot down
and nothing left. Oh, yeah, it had no defense. But
at nighttime, now, it'd be a little bit different
operation. But in my opinion, that thing would
have no place in the classical war in Europe. But in
your opinion, the job that it did in jungle
warfare? Terrific. Terrific. It's still a part of
the Special Weapons Forces. It's still a part of
Tactical Air Warfare Special Forces and TAC at
Hurlburt Air Force in Florida. As a matter of fact,
they're still improving it technologically. And
I'm sure, I don't know this, but I'm sure they're
still experimenting with higher caliber weapons
than they should be. Okay.
incidentally
that airplane also can carry a laser marker and
mark mark at night mark a target with the laser uh
laser designator and the fighter flying with it
can drop a bomb at night not ever even see the target
but drop the bombs that work uh disclose
coordination no but i mean how do they don't
understand the technology behind this well the
laser guide bomb on the fighter detects when it
dropped if it's dropped in the envelope of the
flying pattern between the in the area of the
target on the ground where the laser designator
it's a laser itself in the airplane marks a spot it
puts a laser on this target let's say it's a let's
say it's a truck he just shines his laser on the
truck now the The laser emitter,
the laser energy hitting a truck emits energy. The
laser detector on the nose of the bomb, once it's
dropped from the airplane, picks that up and hones
on it. General S. Merlin said that this is the most
technological war in American history. He would,
right, matter of fact. Well, in history. Oh, yeah.
He's absolutely right. I
agree with him. OK. Now that we're on technology in
Vietnam, are there other examples of new Air Force
technology that's used besides a gunship and
these small airplanes? And we talked about the
laser bomb. Anything else? Oh, yeah, in the field
of reconnaissance. Protectable electronics.
Well, in electronic warfare, there were many new
advancements
in the technology of ECM, both detection,
jamming, and jam-free type of equipment,
guidance equipment. It was really a proving
ground for the field of electronic,
electromagnetic warfare. It was really a proving
ground. Matter of fact, a lot of the things we
learned over there are currently oriented to, you
know, the universal warfare.
We talked about the laser-guided bomb.
Phenomenal, the rope.
had its disadvantages compared to the new HARM,
H-A-R-M weapon, in range, in particular speed.
What is the HARM missile? The HARM is the same
thing. It's an advanced strike. Both of them made
it. Air-to-air? No, air-to-surface. For the same
purpose. SAM suppression, if you will.
Surface-to-air missile. And how does the HARM
work? The same way the strike does. except it has a
much greater capability has a longer range it's
supersonic very fast and therefore more
effective it has a greater capability to pick up
electronic emissions in other words the sound
sight it has
well i'm talking about a modern weapon now i better
keep my mouth shut We
still have the harms in our arsenal, then.
Okay, I wanted to ask if we had nuclear
capabilities in Thailand. Actually employed and
deployed horses, no. But you remember I mentioned
B-52s? Sure. They were operating with,
incidentally, carrying 50, 60 bombs. Sure.
You know, B-52 was readily convertible to nuclear
weapons. Oh, absolutely. There's no doubt that we
could have, well, you know, we could introduce, we
could have taken a B-52 off of the United States and
dropped a nuclear weapon from the United States if
we wanted to, if it was ever necessary. I don't know
if we could operate them out with nuclear weapons
or Mokinawa, couldn't we? Sure. So we didn't have
them in Thailand. Or Navy carriers, I'm sure, had
the Navy.
Now you said that, I wanted to ask a question about
insignias. When you were in the area, at Udorn, all
your airplanes had American insignias on them.
because the ranch hands who did the spraying and
the defoliant, and I told you I knew a colonel, a
lieutenant colonel who was one of the pilots of the
ranch hands, they changed the insignias at will. I
mean when they were They'd put Thai insignias on
their airplanes, they'd put Laotian insignias,
they'd put South Vietnamese insignias, and
they'd always change depending on where they were
going to spray. But you didn't ever change yours?
Well, I never had defoliant portions in Thailand.
They always operate out of South Vietnam. So you
never had any dealings with the defoliant? No.
Okay, you also said that naval air bomber strikes
were a tough task, and I said we'd get back to that.
Now tell me about that, naval air bomber strikes.
Well, here again, you know, it's goals and
missions, and basic rules of warfare, if you will,
that are well known by experienced air warfare
people. I mean, Navy and Air Force, and now, you
know, some of the Army boys are operating aircraft
of various types. But basic principle, and I think
it's well accepted by everybody.
I won't say that. It is not well accepted by
everybody. That's the reason of the problem. But
definitely the Air Force. Not accepted by the Navy
now? Apparently
not. Okay. What is it now? In any... war in
particular a theater of operations a particular
area where there's got to be joint operations of
either two or more forces army air force army navy
army navy and air force and let's say throw in a
marine and let's say throw in the cia as i've been
telling you about let's throw throw in a special
weapon special forces which are part of the
airport there's got to be one air commander Now,
this is basic Air Force doctrine, and I agree with
it 100%.
If there was an advocate of this, it was little
Spike Momar. He agreed with it, of course. Well,
General Momar, being a very dedicated man to his
job, and particularly Air Force, and probably, in
my opinion, not probably, but it was, in my
opinion, definitely, the best and most capable
tactical Air Force general we had in the entire Air
Force at the time he was assigned Seventh Air
Force. As a matter of fact, that's the reason he was
assigned Seventh Air Force. And I say this out of
pure respect, not just because he's classmate of
mine, and I like him, but he made an issue of this
when he was given Seventh Air Force, that he wanted
control of No, no. Texas moment with any air
cadets, flying cadets. Oh, okay, okay. He
decided to make an issue of this when he took over
Stafford's Air Force, and I'd say he may have done
it with the full permission of General McConnell,
Chief of Staff of the Air Force.
see the Navy was launching attacks and carriers at
sea off sometimes very near the coast of North
Vietnam, depends on where they were on other
circumstances and so forth, and with their A6s, I
believe that's what, A6, yeah, very capable
airplane with a lot of ECM on it and capability of
all weather strikes and night strikes easily, it
had a capability.
Now also they were in different geographic
location, operating always from the ocean. And
therefore, we're having less area to fly over,
which might be defended by SAM missiles. Whereas
the Air Force situation is a little bit different,
and all of our forces being primarily against
North Vietnam being operated in Thailand. Well,
to launch all of these forces, and generally
speaking, we tried to, it got down to a pattern
where we almost would do it by the clock. It must
have been easy for them. We'd make a strike in the
morning and a strike in the afternoon with these
fighters, and generally speaking, the Navy,
generally speaking, would do the same thing. And
then sometime we got where we started making night
strikes. This had to be coordinated. Now, for two
forces to do this, geographically separated by
you know several hundred miles it definitely took
very careful and close coordination otherwise
you're going to run into problems and we did run
into a few problems because of this very reason and
that's reason got to be one air commander then on
top of this you throw in SAC yeah and who were very
you know prone to defend their right to operate
freely because of the and maybe naturally so,
because of the fact they might have to pull out at
any minute to go on nuclear attacks in another war,
you know. It made it difficult. Of course, General
Momar got support from the Air Force, I don't know,
through Chief Stack, naturally. Even Sack got
support from the standpoint of the Navy. But, of
course, when he got back to Washington, the
decision had to be made. Of course, the Navy
commander, or the carrier right there in the
ocean, he had his channels of command, too, so he'd
go back. Well, of course, these channels would
meet in Washington naturally. Oh, for a big
problem like this, it's always pretty close by.
And, as usual, you know, they discuss it and rave
and rant about it. Maybe JCS fell, and probably, as
a matter of fact, it gets up to a precedent level.
Sure. You can understand. And it gets difficult.
Well,
in these very difficult problems,
demanded and, you know, and discussed and pushed
by very strong-willed people on both sides and
very capable and sincere people on both sides, it
gets tough. You've got to be a referee, an
arbitrator. And that's what we're going to say
sometimes, go clear for president.
The usual answer you find is a compromise. And
that's what happened over there. General Momar
never did get full control of the Navy air, but this
brought about very, very careful and close
coordination, which was, got to the point where it
was very well done, very capable, and very
efficient. How about the quality of the Navy
airstrikes? Fantastic. Just as good as ours. Just
as good as the Air Force. Right. Except, except in
some areas. I don't think the Navy had the ECM
capability we had in the, that's the name I got to
find out about this strike
launching aircraft. It killed them. But you don't
think that the Navy had some of the electronic
capabilities, but basically, as far as the
quality of their pilots and competence and
achieving their task, they were as good as the Air
Force? Oh, absolutely. Absolutely. Sounds like
there's a lot of inter-service rivalry in this
job. Is this true? Right. That's what you're
talking about. At the higher level. You get down
where the pilots are. fly and eat and sleep
together ain't no problem no uh but uh well it
sounds like a lot of egos